>> Stewart: ON THIS EDITION FOR
SATURDAY, APRIL 25: DEVASTATION
IN NEPAL FOLLOWING A POWERFUL
EARTHQUAKE-- MORE THAN 1,500 ARE
FEARED DEAD; NEW PROTESTS IN
BALTIMORE FOLLOWING THE DEATH OF
A YOUNG AFRICAN-AMERICAN MAN IN
POLICE CUSTODY; HOW ISRAEL'S
WATER SURPLUS COULD ALTER
RELATIONS WITH ITS ARAB
NEIGHBORS.
>> ISRAEL NOT ONLY HAS PLENTY TO
DRINK, BUT POTENTIALLY PLENTY TO
SHARE.
>> Stewart: CAN WHAT ISRAEL HAS
LEARNED BE PUT TO USE IN
CALIFORNIA?
NEXT ON PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND.
FROM THE TISCH WNET STUDIOS IN
LINCOLN CENTER IN NEW YORK,
ALISON STEWART.
>> Stewart: GOOD EVENING.
THANKS FOR JOINING US.
ABOUT 1,500 PEOPLE HAVE BEEN
KILLED IN NEPAL AFTER A POWERFUL
EARTHQUAKE REGISTERING 7.8 ON
THE RICHTER SCALE STRUCK EARLIER
TODAY.
ELLEN BARRY, THE SOUTH ASIA
BUREAU CHIEF OF THE "NEW YORK
TIMES," HAS BEEN FOLLOWING THE
STORY FROM HER POST IN
NEIGHBORING INDIA AND JOINS US
NOW VIA SKYPE.
ELLEN, CAN YOU GIVE US SOME OF
THE DETAILS, FILL US IN ON SOME
OF THE DETAILS, FOR EXAMPLE,
WHAT AREA WAS HARDEST HIT?
>> Reporter: SURE.
I MEAN, THE PART OF KATMANDU
THAT WAS MOST SERIOUSLY
DEVASTATED WAS THE OLD HISTORIC
PART OF TOWN, WHERE THERE IS
SORT OF DENSELY LOCATED
HERITAGE, LANDMARK BUILDINGS,
TEMPLES AND PALACES.
A NUMBER OF THOSE WERE SIMPLY
PANCAKED, IN SOME CASES WITH A
A LOT OF PEOPLE INSIDE THEM.
>> Stewart: ELLEN, FOR THOSE
THAT DID SURVIVE THIS QUAKE AND
ARE TRAPPED IN THE RUBBLE AND
ARE BEING RESCUED, WHAT KIND OF
MEDICAL ATTENTION IS AVAILABLE
FOR THEM?
>> WHAT I HEARD TOWARDS THE END
OF THE DAY IS THAT THE HOSPITALS
WERE COMPLETELY OVERFLOWING.
PEOPLE BEING TREATED IN THE
STREET, AND THERE WERE SHORTAGES
OF BASIC MEDICAL GOODS LIKE
GAUZE, AS WELL AS MEDICATIONS.
THERE ARE A LOT OF PEOPLE WHO
HAD TO HAVE AMPUTATIONS BECAUSE
THEY WERE STUCK IN COLLAPSED
BUILDINGS DURING THE COURSE OF
THE DAY.
WATER IS GOING TO BE A BIG
PROBLEM IN KATMANDU.
THE STORES WERE ALREADY RUNNING
SHORT OF BOTTLED WATER, AND EVEN
UNDER NORMAL CIRCUMSTANCES IT'S
A CITY THAT HAS SERIOUS PROBLEMS
WITH WATER.
>> Stewart: IN TERMS OF RELIEF
AGENCIES, HAVE THEY BEEN ABLE TO
GET TO THE CITY AND GET TO THE
SITE?
AND WHO'S SENDING RELIEF?
>> WELL, BOTH CHINA AND INDIA
HAVE COME FORWARD PROPOSING
SIGNIFICANT RELIEF, BUT I THINK
A LOT OF IT IS ON THE WAY RIGHT
NOW.
THERE'S A WHOLE AREA THAT HAS
BEEN... HAS NOT REALLY BEEN
REACHED BY ANYONE, AND THAT IS A
LOT OF VILLAGES AROUND KATMANDU,
WHERE PEOPLE ARE LIVING IN
THATCH AND MUD HOUSES THAT MAY
HAVE BEEN COMPLETELY DEMOLISHED.
THOSE NUMBERS, WE'LL GET MORE OF
A SENSE OF THOSE TOMORROW I
THINK WHEN RESCUE TEAMS GET OUT
TOWARDS THE EPICENTER OF THE
EARTHQUAKE, WHICH IS ABOUT 50
MILES NORTHWEST OF THE CAPITAL.
>> Stewart: AND I'VE BEEN
FOLLOWING YOUR TWITTER FEED, AND
IT SEEMS THERE ARE STILL TREMORS
BEING FELT?
>> Reporter: YES, AND THE
POPULATION OF KATMANDU IS VERY,
VERY RATTLED.
PEOPLE SCREAM EVERY TIME THERE'S
AN AFTERSHOCK.
SOME OF THE AFTERSHOCKS WERE
VERY PROLONGED.
IN THE FIRST TWO HOURS, I THINK
THERE WERE I THINK 12
SIGNIFICANT AFTERSHOCKS, WHICH
IS A LOT.
MANY PEOPLE HAVE REFUSED TO GO
BACK IN THEIR HOMES OVERNIGHT,
SO THEY'RE SLEEPING OUTSIDE AT
THE PARADE GROUND OR AT MOSQUES
OR SIMPLY ON THE ROAD BECAUSE
THEY'RE AFRAID IF THEY GO
INSIDE THAT THEY WOULD FACE
ANOTHER BUILDING COLLAPSE.
>> Stewart: ELLEN BARRY OF THE
"NEW YORK TIMES," THANK YOU SO
MUCH FOR MAKING THE TIME FOR US.
>> Reporter: THANK YOU.
>> Stewart: FROM THE MIDDLE
EAST, WORD OF NEW GAINS BY
ISLAMIC EXTREMISTS IN SYRIA.
FIGHTERS FROM THE AL QAEDA-
AFFILIATED NUSRA FRONT CAPTURED
WHAT'S BEEN DESCRIBED AS A
STRATEGICALLY LOCATED TOWN WITH
A POPULATION OF 50,000 IN THE
NORTHWEST OF THAT COUNTRY.
LAST MONTH, ANOTHER TOWN NEAR
THE SYRIA-TURKEY BORDER FELL TO
THE ISLAMISTS.
IN NEIGHBORING IRAQ, WEST OF
BAGHDAD, ISLAMIC MILITANTS IN
VEHICLES PACKED WITH BOMBS
ATTACKED AND REPORTEDLY CAPTURED
CONTROL OF A PART OF A DAM.
ACCORDING TO REUTERS, THE DAM
SERVES AS FLOOD CONTROL FOR
BAGHDAD AND OTHER CITIES.
ISIS CLAIMED RESPONSIBILITY FOR
THE ATTACK, WHICH REPORTEDLY
TOOK THE LIVES OF DOZENS OF
IRAQI GOVERNMENT SOLDIERS,
INCLUDING TWO SENIOR OFFICERS.
HERE IN THE UNITED STATES, LARGE
NEW PROTESTS TODAY IN BALTIMORE
OVER THE RECENT DEATH OF AN
AFRICAN-AMERICAN MAN WHILE HE
WAS IN POLICE CUSTODY.
25-YEAR-OLD FREDDIE GRAY DIED
LAST SUNDAY.
HIS FAMILY SAID IN A STATEMENT
THAT HIS SPINE WAS 80% SEVERED
AT THE NECK AFTER POLICE
APPREHENDED HIM.
THE BALTIMORE POLICE DEPARTMENT
SAYS IT HAS NOT CONCLUDED ITS
INVESTIGATION BUT DID
ACKNOWLEDGE THAT THE ARRESTING
OFFICERS SHOULD HAVE CALLED FOR
AN AMBULANCE.
WE'LL HAVE MORE FROM A
"BALTIMORE SUN" REPORTER
COVERING THIS STORY IN A MOMENT.
NOW TO HAWAII.
IT IS ON THE VERGE OF BECOMING
THE FIRST STATE TO RAISE THE
LEGAL SMOKING AGE.
BOTH THE STATE HOUSE AND SENATE
HAVE PASSED LEGISLATION THAT
BARS ANYONE YOUNGER THAN 21
YEARS OLD FROM SMOKING, BUYING
OR POSSESSING EITHER CIGARETTES
OR ELECTRONIC CIGARETTES.
HOWEVER, THE GOVERNOR STILL
NEEDS TO SIGN THE BILL.
THE CENTERS FOR DISEASE CONTROL
AND PREVENTION SAYS SMOKING IS
THE LEADING CAUSE OF PREVENTABLE
DEATHS IN THE UNITED STATES.
NEARLY HALF A MILLION PEOPLE DIE
A YEAR AS A RESULT OF SMOKING.
TENNESSEE HAS A NEW LAW ALLOWING
PEOPLE WITH HANDGUN PERMITS TO
CARRY THEIR FIREARMS TO PARKS,
PLAYGROUNDS AND SPORTS FIELDS.
THE NATIONAL RIFLE ASSOCIATION
HAILED THE NEWS AS A VICTORY FOR
SECOND AMENDMENT FREEDOMS.
THE LEGISLATION WAS OPPOSED BY
GUN CONTROL ACTIVISTS AND BY THE
MAYOR OF THE STATE'S SECOND
BIGGEST CITY, NASHVILLE, WHO
SAID THE NEW STATE LEGISLATION
WOULD OVERRIDE ANY LOCAL BANS
THAT HAD BEEN PUT IN PLACE.
ALMOST 17 MILLION PEOPLE WATCHED
OLYMPIC CHAMPION BRUCE JENNER
SAY IN A NATIONALLY-TELEVISED
INTERVIEW LAST NIGHT, QUOTING
NOW, "FOR ALL INTENTS AND
PURPOSES, I AM A WOMAN."
JENNER, WHO WON THE DECATHLON IN
1976, SAID DURING AN INTERVIEW
WITH DIANE SAWYER OF ABC NEWS
THAT HE HAS KNOWN HE'S TRULY
FEMALE SINCE HE WAS A CHILD.
JENNER IS NOW 65.
JENNER ALSO TOLD SAWYER THE
INTERVIEW WAS HIS LAST AS A MAN.
AND IF YOU'RE LOOKING TO GO
SOMEWHERE WHERE PEOPLE ARE
HAPPY, YOU MIGHT WANT TO BOOK A
TRIP TO SWITZERLAND.
SWITZERLAND CAME IN NUMBER ONE
IN THE U.N'S THIRD ANNUAL WORLD
HAPPINESS REPORT.
FACTORS CONSIDERED INCLUDED LIFE
EXPECTANCY, ECONOMIC STANDING
AND FREEDOM.
AND IN CASE YOU WERE WONDERING,
OUT OF 158 COUNTRIES, THE UNITED
STATES CAME IN 15th.
>> Stewart: FOR MORE ABOUT THE
INVESTIGATION INTO THE DEATH IN
BALTIMORE OF 25-YEAR-OLD FREDDIE
GRAY, WE'RE JOINED NOW BY LUKE
BROADWATER.
HE IS A REPORTER FOR THE
"BALTIMORE SUN."
AND LUKE, CAN YOU JUST GET UP US
TO SPEED ON WHERE THE
INVESTIGATION STANDS NOW?
>> YES.
THE POLICE DEPARTMENT IS
FOCUSING IN ON WHAT THEY DON'T
KNOW AND WHAT THEY STILL NEED TO
FIGURE OUT.
AND THERE ARE TWO KEY GAPS IN
THE INFORMATION THAT WE KNOW.
ONE IS THE TIME FROM WHEN
FREDDIE GRAY RUNS FROM POLICE TO
THAT TIME WHEN THE FIRST VIDEO
THAT WE'VE ALL SEEN PICKS HIM UP
ON THE GROUND, SCREAMING, AS
POLICE ARE ARRESTING HIM.
AND THE SECOND IS, WHAT HAPPENED
INSIDE THE VAN?
>> Stewart: LET'S TALK A
LITTLE BIT MORE ABOUT THAT TIME
INSIDE THE VAN.
THERE'S BEEN A LOT OF ATTENTION
GIVEN TO WHAT HAS BEEN CALLED
"ROUGH RIDES," GIVING ROUGH
RIDES TO PEOPLE WHO ARE IN
CUSTODY.
CAN YOU EXPLAIN TO OUR VIEWERS
WHAT THAT MEANS?
>> WELL, A ROUGH RIDE IS AN
UNSANCTIONED TECHNIQUE.
IT'S ACTUALLY ILLEGAL.
YOU'RE NOT SUPPOSED TO DO IT.
IT VIOLATES DEPARTMENT POLICY.
BY POLICY, DETAINEES ARE
SUPPOSED TO BE SEATBELTED AND
SECURED INSIDE A VAN, AND ANY
TIME AN OFFICER DRIVES
ERRATICALLY TO TRY TO THROW
SOMEBODY AROUND AND INJURE THEM,
THAT IS INTENTIONALLY CAUSING
HARM AND THAT IS NOT ALLOWED
UNDER POLICE PROCEDURES.
THERE HAVE BEEN MULTIPLE
LAWSUITS AGAINST THE POLICE
DEPARTMENT OVER TIME, INCLUDING
SOME BIG JUDGMENTS, FOR THESE
KINDS OF ACTIONS.
AND THE PROBLEM WITH A ROUGH
RIDE IS, BECAUSE THE PERSON HAS
THEIR HANDS HANDCUFFED, THEY
CAN'T BRACE THEMSELVES.
SO, IF YOU TAKE A RAPID TURN
AROUND THE CORNER AND CAUSE THE
GENTLEMAN TO FALL FORWARD,
BASHING HIS HEAD INTO SOMETHING,
THERE'S NO WAY FOR HIM TO BRACE
HIMSELF.
>> Stewart: THERE HAVE BEEN
TWO ENORMOUS JUDGMENTS, ONE FOR
$39 MILLION FOR ONE PERSON,
ANOTHER FOR $7.4 MILLION.
WE SHOULD SAY THAT BOTH OF THOSE
PEOPLE WERE PARALYZED.
AND A THIRD WOMAN IS SUING IN
FEDERAL COURT... A THIRD PERSON
IS SUING IN FEDERAL COURT.
AND I WANT TO READ A
QUOTE.
THIS IS FROM THE "BALTIMORE
SUN" WHICH SOME OF YOUR
COLLEAGUES HAVE REPORTED.
SHE'S DESCRIBED IT THIS WAY:
SO, IF WE PULL OUT A LITTLE BIT,
DOES THIS SUGGEST A BIGGER
PROBLEM REGARDING THE POLICE IN
BALTIMORE?
>> THE BALTIMORE POLICE HAVE A
LONG AND NEGATIVE HISTORY WITH
THE CITY OF BALTIMORE, WITH THE
RESIDENTS.
THIS DATES BACK... FRANKLY, IT
DATES BACK A CENTURY.
AND I DON'T THINK THAT
NECESSARILY THE PROBLEMS OF THE
POLICE DEPARTMENT CAN BE LOOKED
AT JUST IN A VACUUM.
BALTIMORE ITSELF HAS A LONG
HISTORY OF RACISM AND RACIST
PRACTICES IN TERMS OF
SEGREGATIONIST HOUSING, WHERE
WHITE... COVENANTS FOR WHITE
NEIGHBORHOODS CAUSED SOME PEOPLE
TO LIVE IN SOME NEIGHBORHOODS
AND BLACKS WERE FORCED OUT INTO
OTHER NEIGHBORHOODS.
AND TO THIS DAY, WE'VE SEEN THE
RAMIFICATIONS OF THAT.
UNDER TWO MAYORS AGO, GOVERNOR
O'MALLEY IN A TOUGH-ON-CRIME
EFFORT, A PROGRAM CALLED ZERO
TOLERANCE WAS PUT INTO PLACE,
AND THAT RESULTED IN OVER
100,000 ARRESTS OF BALTIMORE
CITY RESIDENTS ALMOST EVERY
YEAR.
THAT'S ABOUT ONE IN SIX PEOPLE
IN BALTIMORE WERE ARRESTED.
AND SOMETIMES AS MUCH AS A
FOURTH OF THOSE CASES DIDN'T
EVEN RESULT IN CHARGES.
AND THOSE RESULTED IN A BIG RIFT
BETWEEN THE COMMUNITY AND THE
POLICE DEPARTMENT.
>> Stewart: LUKE BROADWATER
FROM THE "BALTIMORE SUN."
THANKS FOR SHARING YOUR
REPORTING, LUKE.
>> Reporter: THANK YOU.
>> Stewart: AND NOW TO OUR
SIGNATURE PIECE, OUR ORIGINAL
REPORTS FROM AROUND THE NATION
AND AROUND THE WORLD.
TONIGHT, WE TAKE YOU TO ISRAEL,
WHICH, DURING THE PAST DOZEN
YEARS, HAS USED TECHNOLOGY TO
OVERCOME CHRONIC WATER
SHORTAGES.
IT'S A DEVELOPMENT WITH
POTENTIALLY IMPORTANT POLITICAL
IMPLICATIONS FOR THAT PART OF
THE WORLD.
NEWSHOUR SPECIAL CORRESPONDENT
MARTIN FLETCHER REPORTS.
>> Reporter: THE BIBLICAL RIVER
JORDAN, A RARE FRESHWATER
RESOURCE IN THE MIDDLE EAST.
IT FORMS THE BORDER BETWEEN
ISRAEL AND THE WEST BANK AND
JORDAN.
AT THIS BEND, ABOUT SIX MILES
FROM JERICHO, IT IS BELIEVED
JOHN THE BAPTIST BAPTIZED JESUS
OF NAZARETH.
THESE PILGRIMS HAIL FROM
BALLSTON SPA, UPSTATE NEW YORK.
HOW'S THE WATER?
>> IT'S COLD!
>> Reporter: AND SHALLOW, TOO.
IN THE '60s, THE WATER LEVEL OF
THE JORDAN RIVER WAS ACTUALLY
WHERE WE'RE STANDING NOW.
>> IN WINTERTIME, IT WAS THIS
HIGH.
>> Reporter: GIDON BROMBERG IS
ISRAEL DIRECTOR OF ECOPEACE
MIDDLE EAST, AN ENVIRONMENTAL
GROUP.
>> PILGRIMS, WHEN THEY CAME
HERE, WERE UNDER THREAT OF BEING
DROWNED BY THE STRENGTH, BY THE
POWER OF THIS RIVER.
TODAY, A MOUSE WHEEL WILL HARDLY
TURN WITH WHAT'S LEFT OF THIS
RIVER.
>> Reporter: FOR DECADES, ISRAEL
AND ITS NEIGHBORS DIVERTED THE
JORDAN'S FLOW TO SUPPLY DRINKING
WATER AND WATER FOR CROPS.
WHILE THE RIVER IS DOWN 95% FROM
ITS HISTORICAL FLOW, THERE'S
HOPE THAT SOMEDAY IT COULD
RETURN TO ITS FORMER GLORY.
THAT'S BECAUSE ISRAEL TODAY HAS
MORE WATER THAN IT NEEDS; IT'S
GONE FROM DROUGHT TO WATER
SURPLUS IN JUST A FEW YEARS--
IMPRESSIVE ANYWHERE, BUT
ESPECIALLY IN THE ARID MIDDLE
EAST, ONE OF THE DRIEST REGIONS
IN THE WORLD.
FOR YEARS, ISRAEL'S WATER
AUTHORITY RAN PUBLIC SERVICE TV
ADS LIKE THIS ONE.
"ISRAEL'S DRYING UP," SHE SAYS,
AS HER FACE BEGINS TO CRACK.
"SAVE WATER!"
NOW THE ADS HAVE BEEN
DISCONTINUED, NOT NEEDED
ANYMORE.
THROUGH A COMBINATION OF
RECYCLING, CONSERVATION AND MOST
RECENTLY DESALINATION
TECHNOLOGY-- REMOVING SALT FROM
SALTWATER-- ISRAEL NOT ONLY HAS
PLENTY TO DRINK, BUT POTENTIALLY
PLENTY TO SHARE.
AND THAT COULD BE GOOD NEWS FOR
EASING TENSIONS IN A REGION
WHERE WATER IS OFTEN THE SOURCE
OF CONFLICT.
ISRAEL IS ALREADY EASILY THE
WORLD LEADER IN WATER REUSE, FAR
OUTPACING THE REST OF THE WORLD,
INCLUDING THE UNITED STATES.
ACROSS ISRAEL, PLANTS LIKE THIS
ONE IN THE DESERT TOWN OF RAHAT
TREAT WASTEWATER INSTEAD OF
LETTING IT GO TO WASTE.
SO-CALLED GREY WATER FROM THE
KITCHEN AND BATHROOM AS WELL AS
BLACK WATER FROM SEWAGE IS
FILTERED, CLEANED AND REUSED FOR
IRRIGATION.
IT'S A PERFECT LITTLE RECYCLING
ECOSYSTEM.
THE WASTE FROM THE PEOPLE OF
RAHAT OVER THERE IS TREATED HERE
AND THEN USED TO IRRIGATE THE
FIELDS NEARBY.
BUT THE REAL LEAP FORWARD HAS
BEEN IN DESALINATION TECHNOLOGY,
VASTLY IMPROVING ISRAEL'S
ABILITY TO TURN SALTY WATER INTO
FRESH DRINKING WATER.
IN TEN YEARS, ISRAEL HAS BUILT
FIVE DESALINATION PLANTS ALONG
ITS MEDITERRANEAN COAST IN
ASHKELON, ASHDOD, SOREK,
PALMACHIM AND HADERA.
EACH COST AROUND $400 MILLION.
THEY'RE PRIVATELY OWNED AND SELL
THEIR WATER TO THE GOVERNMENT,
WHICH SELLS IT ON TO THE PEOPLE.
TOGETHER, THE DESALINATION
PLANTS PROVIDE UP TO 50% OF
ISRAEL'S DRINKING WATER.
THE ISRAELIS HAVE ACHIEVED
SOMETHING EXTRAORDINARY.
FIVE, SIX, SEVEN YEARS AGO, IT
WAS ALL ABOUT "SAVE WATER AND
BATHE TOGETHER," AND NOW THEY'VE
GOT MORE WATER THAN THEY NEED.
>> IT IS REMARKABLE.
IT'S BEEN A SLOW PROCESS.
SO, ISRAEL'S LEADERSHIP IN
TREATING SEWAGE HAS TAKEN PLACE
OVER THE LAST 15 YEARS, BUT THE
BREAKTHROUGH HAS BEEN IN THE
DEVELOPMENT OF MEMBRANE
TECHNOLOGY FOR DESALINATION
BECAUSE THAT BREAKTHROUGH IN
TECHNOLOGY DRAMATICALLY REDUCED
THE COSTS OF DESALINATING
SEAWATER.
>> Reporter: FROM ABOUT $1 A
CUBIC METER TO ABOUT 40 CENTS.
>> EXACTLY.
TO LESS THAN HALF THE COST.
>> Reporter: TEN MILES SOUTH OF
TEL AVIV, THE SOREK PLANT, OPEN
ONLY 18 MONTHS, CALLS ITSELF THE
WORLD'S BIGGEST SEAWATER
DESALINATION PLANT OF ITS KIND.
IT CAN PRODUCE MORE THAN 600,000
CUBIC METERS OF DRINKING WATER A
DAY, ENOUGH FOR 1.5 MILLION
PEOPLE, ALMOST A FIFTH OF
ISRAEL'S POPULATION.
AVSHALOM FELBER IS C.E.O. OF IDE
TECHNOLOGIES, WHICH BUILT THE
SOREK DESALINATION PLANT.
THIS IS WHERE THE WATER FROM THE
MEDITERRANEAN ENTERS THE PLANT.
>> EXACTLY.
UNDER HERE IS A DEEP PIT ABOUT
70 METERS DOWN WHERE ALL THIS
WATER IS COLLECTED, AND IT COMES
BY GRAVITY FROM THE SEA; IT'S
UNDER SEA LEVEL.
THE PUMPS HERE LIFT IT HERE FROM
THIS PIT TO THE PRETREATMENT
AREA.
>> Reporter: FROM PRE-TREATMENT,
THE WATER MOVES THROUGH A SERIES
OF SMALLER AND SMALLER SCREENS
AND FILTERS.
THEN, THE WATER IS PIPED INTO
THIS COMPLEX OF BUILDINGS WHERE
A FINE MEMBRANE IS USED TO
REMOVE THE LAST BITS OF SALT AND
OTHER MINERALS.
THERE'S ABOUT 2,000 PRESSURE
VESSELS HERE THAT SHOOT WATER
DOWN THROUGH THE MEMBRANES AT A
PRESSURE OF 70 ATMOSPHERES.
HALFWAY DOWN, THE WATER BECOMES
DRINKING WATER.
THE DESALINATED WATER FINALLY
PASSES THROUGH THESE PIPES TO
ENTER ISRAEL'S WATER GRID.
THIS TAP IS ALWAYS OPEN TO CHECK
AT EVERY INSTANT THE QUALITY OF
THE WATER THAT ISRAELIS WILL
DRINK.
>> 45 MINUTES AGO, THIS WAS
SEAWATER, AND NOW DRINK IT AND
SEE HOW TASTY IT IS.
YOU LIKE IT?
ACCORDING TO SPEC?
>> Reporter: STILL, THERE ARE
QUESTIONS ABOUT ITS
ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT; VERY SALTY
WATER IS A BYPRODUCT OF THE
PROCESS, AND IT GETS DUMPED BACK
INTO THE MEDITERRANEAN.
ENVIRONMENTALISTS SAY THERE'S
NOT ENOUGH INFORMATION TO KNOW
THE LONG-TERM IMPACTS THAT MIGHT
HAVE ON SEA LIFE.
AND THE PROCESS USES A LOT OF
ENERGY, AROUND 3% OF ALL OF
ISRAEL'S ANNUAL ELECTRICITY
OUTPUT.
AS EVERYTHING HERE IS POLITICS,
ISRAEL'S NEW WATER INDEPENDENCE
COULD YIELD POLITICAL PROGRESS,
THOUGH HISTORICALLY THAT
PROGRESS HAS BEEN SLOW.
>> THE BIGGEST PROBLEM IS THE
MINDSET.
IT'S BEEN ALL OR NOTHING FOR THE
LAST 20 YEARS.
THE NEGOTIATIONS IN THE PEACE
PROCESS HAVE EITHER BEEN "WE
AGREE ON ALL FIVE FINAL STATUS
ISSUES OF THE PEACE PROCESS--
WATER BEING ONE OF THEM, BUT
ALSO JERUSALEM, SETTLEMENTS,
BORDERS-- OR WE AGREE ON
NOTHING."
AND THEREFORE, FOR 20 YEARS,
WE'VE AGREED ON NOTHING.
>> Reporter: WATER'S OFTEN
CAUGHT UP IN WIDER POLITICAL
DEBATES.
FOR EXAMPLE, WE VISITED THE
PLANNED WEST BANK PALESTINIAN
CITY OF RAWABI, WHERE
CONSTRUCTION STOPPED FOR A YEAR
AND A HALF OVER DISPUTES ABOUT
WATER.
THE ISRAELI PRIME MINISTER CUT
THROUGH THE RED TAPE THIS YEAR
AND PROMISED TO OPEN THE TAP
THIS SPRING.
STILL, IN THE PAST, THE ISRAELIS
HAVE USED WATER TO PREVENT
CONFLICT.
IN THEIR 1994 PEACE ACCORD,
ISRAEL AGREED TO PROVIDE JORDAN
WITH 5% OF ITS ANNUAL WATER
NEEDS AT NO COST, AND THAT'S
BEEN INCREASED TO ABOUT 7% JUST
BECAUSE ISRAEL CAN.
AND WATER EXPERTS LIKE BROMBERG
HOPE ISRAEL'S GOVERNMENT WILL
USE ITS CURRENT WATER SURPLUS TO
EXTEND THE SAME GENEROSITY TO
THE PALESTINIANS LIVING IN THE
WEST BANK.
>> WE CAN MOVE FORWARD TODAY,
AND EVERY PALESTINIAN CAN TURN
ON THEIR TAP AND HAVE WATER
FLOWING.
>> Reporter: IN FACT, THE
ISRAELI GOVERNMENT HAS AGREED IN
PRINCIPLE TO SELL THE
PALESTINIANS 20 MILLION TO 30
MILLION CUBIC METERS OF ITS
DESALINATED WATER, ENOUGH TO
SUPPLY DRINKING WATER TO THE
WEST BANK FOR ABOUT EIGHT
MONTHS.
WATER OFFICIALS FROM BOTH SIDES
SAY THEY ARE EAGER TO WORK
TOGETHER.
THE HEAD OF THE ISRAELI WATER
AUTHORITY'S DESALINATION
DIVISION, AVRAHAM TENNE:
>> WE, AS THE WATER PEOPLE, WE
DO SPEAK TOGETHER.
WE DON'T WAIT TO HAVE COMMITTEES
TO MEET TOGETHER.
WE MEET MANY TIMES, EVEN DURING
ALL KINDS OF WARS, ALL KINDS OF
CONFLICTS THAT WE HAVE WITH
THEM.
WATER PEOPLE ARE TALKING ALL THE
TIME, MEETING ALL THE TIME AND
SHARING INFORMATION ALL THE
TIME.
>> Reporter: PALESTINIAN WATER
MINISTER MAZEN GHONEIM:
>> WE HAVE NOTHING AGAINST THE
ISRAELI SIDE.
WHAT WE WANT, EXACTLY, JUST TO
HELP OUR PEOPLE.
>> Reporter: TODAY, ISRAEL'S
CHALLENGE IS TO DO ALL IT CAN TO
SECURE ITS WATER INDEPENDENCE
AND TO USE THAT INDEPENDENCE TO
BUILD BRIDGES WITH ITS
NEIGHBORS.
>> Stewart: KEEPING ISRAEL'S
SUCCESSFUL PLAN IN MIND, WE
WONDERED IF OR HOW ISRAEL'S
WATER TECHNOLOGY, ESPECIALLY ITS
USE OF DESALINATION, COULD BE
PUT TO USE IN DROUGHT-STRICKEN
CALIFORNIA.
FOR MORE ABOUT THAT NOW, WE ARE
JOINED FROM SAN FRANCISCO BY
DANIEL POTTER.
HE IS A REPORTER FOR KQED
SCIENCE.
SO, DANIEL, IT'S SORT OF
OBVIOUS.
PEOPLE LOOK AND THINK, WELL,
CALIFORNIA'S OBVIOUSLY RIGHT
NEXT TO THE PACIFIC OCEAN.
WHY ISN'T DESALINATION A
BIGGER PART OF CONVERSATION
ABOUT THE DROUGHT?
WHY ISN'T IT?
>> I THINK THE SHORT ANSWER IS
BECAUSE DESALINATION IS A
REALLY... SETTING UP A
DESALINATION PLANT IS A VERY
LONG-TERM PROCESS.
IT REQUIRES A LOT OF PERMITTING
AND A HUGE AMOUNT OF INVESTMENT.
SO, SETTING UP A DESALINATION
PLANT, A LOT OF PEOPLE I HAVE
TALKED TO HAVE SAID THERE IS A
GOOD CHANCE THAT PLANT WOULD NOT
BE FINISHED UNTIL LONG AFTER THE
DROUGHT ENDED.
>> Stewart: ARE THERE
DESALINATION PLANT WORKING, IN
PROGRESS IN CALIFORNIA?
I KNOW THERE ARE A COUPLE THAT
ARE IN THE PROCESS OF BEING
CONSTRUCTED, CORRECT?
>> Reporter: THERE ARE A FEW
TINY ONES THAT ALREADY EXIST AND
THAT ARE DESALINATING PRESENTLY.
THE BIGGEST ONE IS IN CARLSBAD.
IT'S SET TO COME ONLINE
PROBABLY THIS FALL, AND WHEN
IT'S READY IT WILL PRODUCE
SOMETHING LIKE 7% OF THE WATER
FOR SAN DIEGO COUNTY.
THAT PROJECT IS ON THE ORDER OF
SOMETHING LIKE $900 MILLION OR
MAYBE $1 BILLION.
>> Stewart: SO, IS THERE SOME
SORT OF SUBTEXT HERE ABOUT THE
PRIVATIZATION OF WATER?
>> Reporter: I THINK THAT'S A
FRAUGHT TOPIC, ESPECIALLY IN
CALIFORNIA, BECAUSE THE HISTORY
OF WATER POLICY HERE IS SO
COMPLEX AND SO MANY PEOPLE HAVE
DIFFERENT AND COMPETING SOURCES
OF WATER.
YOU HAVE A FARMER IN ONE PLACE
WHO HAS TO LET HIS CROPS DIE,
AND A FARMER IN ANOTHER PLACE
WHO IS PLANTING ALMONDS WHICH
ARE A VERY WATER-INTENSIVE CROP,
BECAUSE ONE GUY HAS ACCESS TO
WATER AND ANOTHER ONE DOESN'T.
ONE PLACE CAN PAY MAYBE TEN
BUCKS AN ACRE FOOT, WHICH IS
ABOUT A THIRD OF A MILLION
GALLONS OF WATER.
ANOTHER PLACE IN SOUTHERN
CALIFORNIA, PEOPLE PAY HUNDREDS
OF DOLLARS PER ACRE FOOT.
>> Stewart: WHAT IS THE
POLITICAL CLIMATE AROUND
DESALINATION?
>> THERE'S A TENSION THERE.
I THINK FOR COMPANIES THAT SEE
DESALINATION AS AN INVESTMENT
OPPORTUNITY, THERE'S A LOT OF
POTENTIAL, AND THEY SEE IT AS A
BIG GROWTH AREA.
OTHER PARTS OF CALIFORNIA...
CALIFORNIA, OBVIOUSLY, HAS A
VERY STRONG ENVIRONMENTAL
CULTURE, AND A LOT OF PEOPLE ARE
SKEPTICAL OF IT.
A LOT OF PEOPLE SAY WHY TURN TO
DESALINATION?
IT'S ALMOST AN EXTREME RESPONSE
COMPARED TO CONSERVATION,
COMPARED TO RECLAIMED WATER.
>> Stewart: AND THE
ENVIRONMENTAL ISSUE IS THE EXTRA
SALT THAT COMES OUT OF THE
WATER, WHAT HAPPENS TO IT WHEN
YOU PUT BACK IN THE OCEAN?
IS THAT RIGHT?
>> Reporter: THAT'S ONE BIG
FACTOR, YES.
THERE'S A LOT OF LEFTOVER SALT
THAT IF YOU'RE NOT CAREFUL, IF
IT'S DUMPED BACK IN ALL AT ONCE,
IT'S MUCH DENSER THAN SEA WATER
SO IT SINKS AND CAN HURT SEA
LIFE ON THE BOTTOM WHEREVER IT'S
DUMPED.
IT TAKES A LOT OF ENERGY TO RUN
A DESAL PLANT AND SO PEOPLE
GROUSE ABOUT THE CARBON
FOOTPRINT, AS WELL.
>> Stewart: DANIEL POTTER FROM
KQED, THANKS FOR SHARING YOUR
REPORTING.
>> GLADLY.
>> Stewart: WANT TO KNOW MORE
ABOUT DESALINATION?
SEE THE STEP-BY-STEP PROCESS IN
OUR VIDEO FROM THE ISRAEL PLANT.
VISIT facebook.com/newshour.
>>THIS IS PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND,
SATURDAY.
>> Stewart: A COUPLE OF MILLION
PEOPLE VISIT THE PRADO MUSEUM IN
MADRID, SPAIN, EACH YEAR TO SEE
WORLD-FAMOUS WORKS OF ART SUCH
AS "THE ANNUNCIATION," "THE
GARDEN OF EARTHLY DELIGHTS" AND
"LAS MENINAS."
NOW, FOR THE FIRST TIME, THE
MUSEUM IS ATTRACTING A SET OF
PATRONS WHO ARE ABLE TO
EXPERIENCE THE ARTWORK IN A
DIFFERENT WAY, BY TOUCHING IT.
56-YEAR-OLD JOSÉ PEDRO GONZÁLEZ
LOST HIS SIGHT AT AGE 14 DUE TO
A DETACHED RETINA.
TODAY, HE'S AT THE PRADO MUSEUM,
RUNNING HIS HANDS ALONG EL
GRECO'S "NOBLEMAN."
IT'S ONE OF SIX REPRODUCED
PAINTINGS IN THE EXHIBITION
CALLED "TOUCHING THE PRADO."
>> (translated): SUDDENLY, I
SAW THE RUFFS.
THEY GO ALL THE WAY UP TO HIS
EARS.
I SAW THEM.
AND WHAT ELSE DID I NOTICE?
WELL, HOW THE PAINTING IS DONE.
LOOK, THIS HAS A DIFFERENT
TEXTURE THAN THIS.
>> Stewart: GONZÁLEZ REPRESENTS
LA ONCE, SPAIN'S NATIONAL
ASSOCIATION FOR THE BLIND.
IT'S ONE OF THE ORGANIZATIONS
THAT HELPED BRING THIS
EXHIBITION TO THE MUSEUM.
>> (translated): I HAVE NEVER
BEEN GIVEN THE CHANCE TO TOUCH A
PAINTING IN A MUSEUM, NOT EVEN
IN A SMALLER VERSION OF IT.
SO, FOR ME, THIS IS A UNIQUE
EXPERIENCE.
>> Stewart: THE TACTILE COPIES
ARE THE RESULT OF A SPECIAL
TECHNIQUE CALLED DIDÚ, DEVELOPED
IN SPAIN BY DURERO STUDIOS.
DIDÚ WAS FIRST USED IN A 2010
PHOTO EXHIBITION BY A JOURNALIST
WHO HAD LOST MOST OF HIS SIGHT
DUE TO ILLNESS.
THE PROCESS USES SPECIAL INKS
AND ULTRAVIOLET LIGHT TO RAISE
PARTS OF THE IMAGES, ALLOWING
THE WORKS TO BE VISUALIZED.
THE PRADO PAID A LITTLE MORE
THAN $6,000 FOR THIS MONA LISA,
WHICH TOOK 20 DAYS TO RECREATE.
THE REPRODUCTIONS INCLUDE WORKS
BY GOYA AND CORREGGIO.
BLACK CARDBOARD "GLASSES" ARE
PROVIDED SO THOSE WHO CAN SEE
ARE ABLE TO EXPERIENCE THE
EXHIBIT AS THE VISUALLY-IMPAIRED
DO.
"TOUCHING THE PRADO" RUNS
THROUGH THE END OF JUNE.
>> Stewart: SOME MORE NEWS
BEFORE WE LEAVE YOU TONIGHT.
ISRAELI SECURITY FORCES TODAY
KILLED TWO PALESTINIAN MEN WHO
REPORTEDLY ATTACKED THEM WITH
KNIVES.
LATER, PALESTINIAN PROTESTERS
THREW ROCKS AT ISRAELI RIOT
POLICE IN EAST JERUSALEM.
AND A STATE OF EMERGENCY IS NOW
IN EFFECT IN NEPAL AFTER TODAY'S
MAJOR EARTHQUAKE.
THE UNITED STATES HAS DEPLOYED A
TEAM OF DISASTER RELIEF EXPERTS.
JOIN US ON AIR AND ONLINE
TOMORROW.
I'M ALISON STUART IN FOR HARI
SREENIVASAN.
HAVE A GOOD NIGHT.